---
layout:     post
title:      "LXC and the other side of containers"
subtitle:   "Exploring Linux containers beyond Docker"
date:       2016-09-08 12:29:00
author:     "Alessandro Segala"
header-img: "img/ssh-brute-force.jpg"
comments:   yes
---

In the past couple of years, containers have risen in popularity from zero to mainstream. Not only an exclusivity of the most cutting-edge startups, larger enterprises (notoriously more cautious in adopting new technologies) are relying on them too. It would be unfair not to give Docker most of the credits for making containerization an accessible, easy and ubiquitous tool. With its shiny world full of blue whales, hubs and orchestrators, Docker has become for many synonym with containers. However, with an increased awareness of the details and benefits of OS-level virtualization, other, alternative tools have been created — or re-discovered.

**LXC (Linux Containers)** have been around since 2008, when the kernel introduced support for cgroups and namespaces. It's a mature and stable technology, and Docker itself was based on LXC in the early releases. The LXC project is sponsored by Canonical, the same company behind Ubuntu, but the tools are actively developed on other Linux distributions (although pre-built packages may not be available everywhere, and the documentation is sometimes lacking).

## Docker vs LXC

On a high level, technically speaking Docker and LXC are very similar. Both allow encapsulating applications, frameworks and runtimes within a container, isolated from the host system and from other containers. Both Docker and LXC behave *essentially like a VM*, offering a separate storage area and network stack, but without the overhead of a traditional VM; both make containers portable, so they can run on any host and any environment. Lastly, both tools are built on the same kernel features (cgroups, namespaces). Even though from a technical standpoint Docker and LXC seem closely related, they differ substantially in their philosophy.

**Docker is a platform built for devops**, to allow developers to "build, ship and run any app, anywhere", as per their slogan. On the other hand, **LXC is a lightweight virtualization technology for system administrators**. The difference in philosophy is clear when looking at the way the two technologies are used and their recommended patterns.

| **Docker**                                                                      | **LXC**                                                                                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Containers run a bare-minimal OS, with as few applications as possible          | Containers run a full-featured OS environment                                                               |
| Each container should run one and just one process                              | Containers can have as many processes as they need, in foreground and/or background                         |
| No init system - the single service runs in foreground, no cron daemon, no SSH  | There's an init system (e.g. systemd, SysVinit, etc) that manages (multiple) services, can use cron and SSH |
| Containers are stateless, data stored in container isn't persistent by default  | Can store persistent data in containers                                                                     |
| Limited control over the network stack                                          | Full control over the virtualized network stack, can set static IPs, routable IPs, etc                      |

Although with some hacks you can use LXC containers the same way as Docker ones, and vice-versa, you get the best results when following the recommended patterns for each technology.

In practice, the different ideas behind LXC and Docker translated into different design choices and ultimately different administration tools as well. For example, spinning up a typical Nginx + PHP stack with Docker requires up to two different containers: one for Nginx and one for PHP-FPM; communication between them happens over TCP/IP, on a separate, isolated virtual network. With LXC, instead, you can follow the more traditional approach of installing Nginx and the PHP interpreter in the same container, managed by systemd and communicating via a socket.

I won't be arguing that one approach is *better* than the other, as LXC and Docker serve different purposes, and ultimately administrators can decide to use both, adopting the best one for each task. For example, in a traditional two-tiered web application, Docker may be used for the frontend because of its ability to scale horizontally quickly and for the variety of orchestration tools available, while admins might opt for running the database using LXC, for its better support for stateful containers.

## LXC or LXD

In the recent past Canonical, under the LinuxContainers.org umbrella project, started working on LXD as a management layer built on top of LXC. The goal of LXD is to provide a higher-level interface on top of the existing LXC tools, optimized for devops. 

## LXC on Ubuntu 16.04 LTS

In this demo we'll be creating LXC containers in a Ubuntu 16.04 LTS host, running in our favorite cloud, [Microsoft Azure](https://www.azure.com). A nice feature of containers is that, unlike traditional VMs, they run just fine in virtualized environments, and don't require to be on bare metal.




<small>*Cover photo by Martin Majer ([500px](https://500px.com/photo/95395439/2-52-rule-of-thirds-votogs52-by-martin-majer)) released under Creative Commons BY-SA*</small>